A database is a collection of information. Today, most databases are stored as computer files. Databases can incorporate several lists. For example, the database for an e-commerce site, such as Amazon.com, includes inventory lists and customer lists.
The tasks associated with creating, maintaining, and accessing the information in databases are referred to as data management, file management, or database management. Databases can be used in a variety of ways, from a simple tool for collecting and tracking data, to a comprehensive source for making decisions and predicting future trends.
Collect and store data. A database is a collection of data, but that collection grows as additional data is obtained. Data can be collected and entered manually or electronically. Information can also be removed from a database when it is no longer needed.
Update data. One of the primary database management activities is keeping data up to date by entering current addresses, inventory quantities, and so on. As with collecting data, updates can be made manually or electronically.
Organize and output data. The data in a typical database is stored in no particular order. New data is appended to the end of the file. To make data into a more suitable report, it can be organized in different ways. It can be alphabetized, placed in numeric order, grouped and subtotaled. Database output is easy to organize and reorganize without actually rearranging the physical data on the disk.
Distribute data. Databases, combined with mail merge and other computerized technologies, offer efficient ways to distribute information customers, employees, government agencies, and other companies.
Find data. Databases make it easy to locate information. A pharmacist can check a pharmaceutical database for drug interaction before filling a prescription. A computer technician can check a manufacture’s database to find the part number for replacing your computer’s fried hard drive.
Analyze data. Databases include certain facts as raw data, such as names, addresses, bank balances, prices, and inventory quantities. Analyzing this data can produce information that is not readily apparent from simply looking at raw data.
What is data mining? Data mining refers to computer algorithms that analyze information to discover previously unknown and potentially useful information, including relationships and patterns. The data accessed by data mining and analysis techniques is often stored in a data warehouse, which is a storage for data from more than one database. Data from operational databases is transferred to a data warehouse where it can be combined with data from other databases to enhance the data set.
Predictive analytics refers to a branch of data mining that analyzes current and historical data to predict future trends. It makes use of statistical algorithms, neural networks and optimization research to discover patterns in data. For example, researchers might use it to predict customer behavior, unmask terrorists, forecast storm paths, etc. Like data mining, predictive analytics processes data autonomously, rather than under the direction of an operator who specifies what to look for.
OLAP (online analytical processing) is a data analysis technique that allows decision makers to quickly get answers to complex queries that encompass multiple factors, such as locations, revenue, time periods, and employee status. Unlike data mining and predictive analytics, OLAP is an interactive process that allows decision makers to devise unique queries, enter them, and get an immediate response. 
Big data refers to huge collections of data that are difficult to process, analyze, and manage using conventional database tools. An example is the one million transactions generated by Wal-Mart sales registers every hour, which are stored in databases measured in petabytes, not gigabytes or terabytes.
The simplest model for storing data is a flat file that consists of a single, two-dimensional table of data elements. Each row in the table is a record, and each column of the table is a field. Computer databases display records as rows in a table or as forms.
A field contains the smallest unit of meaningful information, so you might call it the basic building block for a structured file or database. Each field has a unique field name that describes its contents. For example, in an iTunes playlist, the field called Name holds the name of a song, the Time field holds the song length, the Artist field holds the name of the performer, the Album field holds the name of the album and the Genre field holds the type of the song.
In the world of databases, a record refers to a collection of data fields. Each record stores data about one entity – a person, place, thing, or event. For example, a data record stored in an iTunes playlist contains fields of data pertaining to a digital music track.
Flat files are the foundation for simple databases, such as an e-mail address book, an iTunes playlist, or the addresses for a mail merge. Spreadsheets are also modeled on flat files. With a flat file, you can search for, update, group and organize records. Each record in a flat file, however, is an independent entity and no relationships can be established between records.
The term DBMS (database management system) refers to software that is designed to manage data stored in a database. Each DBMS specializes in one database model, but some DBMS software offers versatility by dealing with a variety of models and data.
The Web allows access to many databases. When you shop at one online store, for example, the photos, descriptions, and prices you see are pulled from the merchant’s database and displayed as Web pages. More direct database access is offered by online public access catalogs. A database also provides the foundation for online access to course registration systems, real estate listings, movie reviews, flight schedules, and other information.
The Web provides both opportunities and challenges for accessing the information in a database. Obviously, with its global reach, the Web provides an opportunity for many people to gain access to data from multiple locations.
A technique called static Web publishing is a simple way to display the data in a database by converting a database report into an HTML document, which can be displayed as a web page by a browser. Static publishing provides extremely limited access to a database because it creates a Web page that displays a snapshot of your data at the time the report was generated. The advantages include security and simplicity. Your data remains secure because you have not provided direct access to your database, so unauthorized users cannot change your data.
In several situations, such as making e-commerce purchase or registering for a social networking site, it is important for people to use a browser to add or update records in a database.
So, many techniques exist for storing, accessing and displaying the data from databases. Individuals can use simple tools to create personal databases, such as address books. Corporate database managers, however, need to be familiar with more complex tools used to distribute data over networks and the Web. Sometimes more than one database management tool has the potential to work for a specific application.
